Proposal to update mixin uniqueness rules for SCIs (#57)
mobilecoinfoundation/mcips: text/0057-update-mixin-uniqueness-rules-for-scis.md

- Start Date: 2022-11-03
- MCIP PR: [mobilecoinfoundation/mcips#0057](https://github.com/mobilecoinfoundation/mcips/pull/0057)
- Tracking Issue: [mobilecoinfoundation/mobilecoin#2813](https://github.com/mobilecoinfoundation/mobilecoin/issues/2813)

# Summary
[summary]: #summary

Update the transaction validation rules around  "DuplicateRingElements" error,
relaxing them when MCIP #31 Signed Contingent Inputs are present in the transaction.

# Motivation
[motivation]: #motivation

Currently, the consensus enclave enforces the following rule: a ring element cannot appear in two different inputs in the transaction.

If this rule is violated, the transaction fails with a "DuplicateRingElements" error.

The rationale for this rule is
* It is generally possible for clients to sample the mixin ring elements without replacement,
  removing all the real inputs, and so ensure that duplicate ring elements do not occur.
* Doing so may make it more difficult for an adversary to statistically analyze the rings.

This only justifies why this rule should be a **best practice for clients**, but not why
it should be enforced at the level of the consensus network. In fact, this rule is not needed

> to protect the integrity of the cryptocurrency -- it doesn't allow double spends or imbalanced
> transactions to remove this rule. It simply helps to prevent clients from using bad ring sampling
> code in production.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to protect the integrity of the cryptocurrency -- removing it doesn't allow double spends
or imbalanced transactions. It simply helps to prevent clients from using bad ring sampling
code in production.
```

After MCIP #31, the rationale for the rule is no longer universally applicable, because
there may be multiple parties involved in building a transaction. Consider the following scenario:

1. Alice creates a Signed Contingent Input. Alice's client must choose a ring of mixins at this time.
   By chance, Alice chooses one of Bob's outputs as a mixin.
1. Bob tries to create a transaction that incorporates this SCI. Bob's client adds this SCI to the

>    transaction builder, and to pay for it, performs ring selection, also adding some of Bob's outputs.

Author: ```suggestion
   transaction builder, and to pay for it, performs input selection, also adding some of Bob's outputs.
```

for block version 3 revisions. It is not a very easy issue to fix:

* Alice's client cannot work around this because Alice has no idea in advance who will match their SCI.
  The design goal is that Alice's client shouldn't need to care.
* Bob's client cannot work around this because if, for example, Bob only has one output with significant
  value, and it is selected by Alice's client as a mixin, then there is no way that Bob's client can make
  input selection work, even if Bob does have enough funds to satisfy Alice's offer. This will ultimately
  mean giving up and surfacing a strange and hard to understand error to the user.

We take the point of view that, the ground has shifted and the rationale for the original consensus rule has been
undermined. It is no longer the case that

> It is generally possible for clients to sample the mixin ring elements without replacement,
> removing all the real inputs, and so ensure that duplicate ring elements do not occur.

We propose that, the original rule applies to any inputs without rules, and a lesser rule
applies to any inputs with rules -- we only check that ring elements are unique within a ring,

> when the input contains rules. This prevents a regression compared to block version 2.

Author: ```suggestion
when the input contains rules. 

SCI's are new in block version 3, which is not yet released. This change does not allow any transactions that would have been invalid in block version 2 to be valid -- it only changes how this historical rule will apply to new transactions that involve block version 3 features.
```
